[BLOG] Sample Spotlight: Pose Estimation (#29)
microsoft/Windows-DevRel: Blogs/GallerySampleSpotlight/PoseEstimation/blog.md

# Pose Estimation with the AI Dev Gallery

## What's Going On Here?
This blog post is the first in an upcoming series that will spotlight the local AI samples contained in the new [AI Dev Gallery](). The Gallery is a recently released project that aims to showcase local AI scenarios on Windows and to give developers the guidance they need to enable those scenarios themselves. The Gallery is open-source and contains a wide selection of different models and samples, including text, image, audio, and video use cases. In addition to being able to see a given model in action, each sample contains a source code view and a button to export the sample directly to a new Visual Studio project.

The Gallery is available on the [Microsoft Store]() and is entirely open-sourced on [GitHub.]()

For this first sample spotlight, we will be taking a look at one of my favorite scenarios: Human Pose Estimation with HRNet. This samples is enabled ONNX Runtime, and deepending on the processor in your Windows device, this sample supports running on the CPU, GPU, and NPU. I'll cover how to check which hardware is supported and how to switch between them later in the post.

## Pose Estimation Demo

> This sample takes in a photo upload and renders pose estimations onto the main human figure in the photo. It will render connections between the torso and limbs, along with five points corresponding to key facial features (eyes, nose, and ears). Before diving into the code for this sample, here's a quick video example:

Author: ```suggestion
This sample takes in an uploaded photo and renders pose estimations onto the main human figure in the photo. It will render connections between the torso and limbs, along with five points corresponding to key facial features (eyes, nose, and ears). Before diving into the code for this sample, here's a quick video example:
```

## Code Walkthrough
This walkthrough will focus on essential code, and may gloss over some UI logic and helper functions. The full code for this sample can be browsed in depth in the [AI Dev Gallery.]()

When this sample is first opened, it will make an initial call to `LoadModelAsync` which looks like this:

```c#
protected override async Task LoadModelAsync(SampleNavigationParameters sampleParams)
{
    // Tell our inference session where our model lives and which hardware to run it on
    await InitModel(sampleParams.ModelPath, sampleParams.HardwareAccelerator); 
    sampleParams.NotifyCompletion();

    // Make first call to inference once model is loaded
    await DetectPose(Path.Join(Windows.ApplicationModel.Package.Current.InstalledLocation.Path, "Assets", "pose_default.png"));
}
```

In this function, a `ModelPath` and `HardwareAccelerator` are passed into our `InitModel` function, which handles instantiating an ONNX Runtime `InferenceSession` with our model location and the hardware that inference will be performed on. You can jump to [Switching to NPU or GPU Execution]() later in this post for more in depth information on how the `InferenceSession` is instantiated.

> Once the model has finished initializing, this function calls an initial round of inference via `DetectPose`, which is passed a default image.

Author: ```suggestion
Once the model has finished initializing, this function calls for an initial round of inference via `DetectPose` on a default image.
```

```c#
// Load bitmap from image filepath
using Bitmap originalImage = new(filePath);

// Store expected input dimensions in variables, as these will be used later
int modelInputWidth = 256;
int modelInputHeight = 192;

// Resize Bitmap to expected dimensions with ResizeBitmap helper
using Bitmap resizedImage = BitmapFunctions.ResizeBitmap(originalImage, modelInputWidth, modelInputHeight);
```

Once the image is stored in a bitmap of the proper size, we create a `Tensor` of dimensionality `1x3x192x256` that will represent the image. Each dimension, in order, corresponds to these values:

* *Batch Size:* our first value of `1` is just the number of inputs that are being processed. This implementation processes a single image at a time, so the batch size is just one.
* *Color Channels:* The next dimension has a value of `3`, and coressponds to each of the typical color channels: red, green, and blue. This will define the color of each pixel in the image.
* *Width:* The next value of `256` (passed as `modelInputWidth`) is the pixel width of our image.

> * *Height:* The last value of `192` (passed as `modelInputHeight`) is the pixel width of our image.

Author: ```suggestion
* *Height:* The last value of `192` (passed as `modelInputHeight`) is the pixel height of our image.
```

Taken as a whole, this tensor represents a single image where each pixel in that image is defined by an X (width) and Y (height) pixel value and three color values (red, green, blue). 

> Also, it is good to note that processing and inference section of this function is being ran in a Task to prevent the UI from becoming blocked:

Author: ```suggestion
Also, it is good to note that the processing and inference section of this function is being ran in a Task to prevent the UI from becoming blocked:
```

```c#
// Run our processing and inference logic as a Task to prevent the UI from being blocked
var predictions = await Task.Run(() =>
{
    // Define a tensor that represents every pixel of a single image
    Tensor<float> input = new DenseTensor<float>([1, 3, modelInputWidth, modelInputHeight]);
```

> To improve the quality of the input, instead of just passing in the original pixel values to the tensor, the pixels values are normalized with the [`PreprocessBitmapWithStdDev`]() helper function. This function uses the mean of each RGB value and the standard deviation (how far a value typically varies away from its mean) to "level out" outlier color values. You can think of it as a way of preventing images with really dramatic color differences from confusing the model. This step does not affect the dimensionality of the input, and just adjusts the values that will be stored in the tensor:

Author: ```suggestion
To improve the quality of the input, instead of just passing in the original pixel values to the tensor, the pixels values are normalized with the [`PreprocessBitmapWithStdDev`]() helper function. This function uses the mean of each RGB value and the standard deviation (how far a value typically varies away from its mean) to "level out" outlier color values. You can think of it as a way of preventing images with really dramatic color differences from confusing the model. This step does not affect the dimensionality of the input. It only adjusts the values that will be stored in the tensor:
```

First, the function sets up the necessary values for post processing:

```c#
// Fetch the heatmaps list from the inference results
var heatmaps = results[0].AsTensor<float>();

// Get the output name from the inference session
var outputName = _inferenceSession!.OutputNames[0];

// Use the output name to get the dimensions of the output from the inference session
var outputDimensions = _inferenceSession!.OutputMetadata[outputName].Dimensions;

// Finally, get the output width and height from those dimensions
float outputWidth = outputDimensions[2];
float outputHeight = outputDimensions[3];
```

The output width and height are passed, along with the heatmaps list and the original image dimensions, to the [`PostProcessResults`]() helper function. Ths function does two actions with each heatmap:

> 1. It iterates over every value in the heatmap to find at which coordinates the probability is highest for each pose key point.

Author: ```suggestion
1. It iterates over every value in the heatmap to find the coordinates where the probability is highest for each pose key point.
```

1. It scales that value back to the size of the original image, since it was changed when it was passed into inference. This is why the original image dimensions were passed.

From this function, a list of tuples containing the X and Y location of each key point is returned, so that they can be properly rendered onto the image:

```c#
    // Post process heatmap results to get key point coordinates
    List<(float X, float Y)> keypointCoordinates = PoseHelper.PostProcessResults(heatmaps, originalImage.Width, originalImage.Height, outputWidth, outputHeight);

    // Return those coordinates from the task
    return keypointCoordinates;
});
```

Next up is rendering.

### Rendering Pose Predictions

> Rendering is handled by the `RenderPredictions` helper function which takes in the original image, the predictions that were just generated, and a marker ratio to define how large to draw the predictions on the image. Note that this code is still being called from the `DetectPose` function:

Author: ```suggestion
Rendering is handled by the `RenderPredictions` helper function which takes in the original image, the predictions that were generated, and a marker ratio to define how large to draw the predictions on the image. Note that this code is still being called from the `DetectPose` function:
```

```c#
using Bitmap output = PoseHelper.RenderPredictions(originalImage, predictions, .02f);
```

Rendering predictions is pretty key to the pose estimation flow, so let's dive into this function. This function will draw two things:
* Red ellipses at each pose key point (right knee, left eye, etc.)

> * Blue lines connecting joint key points (right knee to right ankle, left shoulder to left elbow, etc.) Face key points (eyes, nose, ears) do not have any connections, and will just have dots ellipses rendered for them.

Reviewer: The sentence starting with "Face key points" might want to be on it's own line since it's not directly related to "blue lines"

```

Next, a list of `(int, int)` tuples is instantiated that represents each connection. Each tuple has a `StartIdx` (where the connection starts, like left shoulder) and an `EndIdx` (where the connection ends, like left elbow). These indexes are always the same based on the output of the pose model and move from top to bottom on the human figure. As a result, you'll notice that indexes 0-4 are skipped, as those indexes represent the face key points, which don't have any connections:

```c#
// Create a list of index tuples that represents each pose connection, face key points are excluded.
List<(int StartIdx, int EndIdx)> connections =
[
    (5, 6),   // Left shoulder to right shoulder
    (5, 7),   // Left shoulder to left elbow
    (7, 9),   // Left elbow to left wrist
    (6, 8),   // Right shoulder to right elbow
    (8, 10),  // Right elbow to right wrist
    (11, 12), // Left hip to right hip
    (5, 11),  // Left shoulder to left hip
    (6, 12),  // Right shoulder to right hip
    (11, 13), // Left hip to left knee
    (13, 15), // Left knee to left ankle
    (12, 14), // Right hip to right knee
    (14, 16) // Right knee to right ankle
];
```

> Next, for each tuple in that list, a blue line represenating a connection is drawn on the image with `DrawLine`. It takes in the `Pen` that was created and start and end coordinates from the keypoints list that was passed into the function:

Reviewer: To get away from and start and end, we could say "that was created, along with start and end coordinates."

Author: ```suggestion
Next, for each tuple in that list, a blue line represenating a connection is drawn on the image with `DrawLine`. It takes in the `Pen` that was created, along with start and end coordinates from the keypoints list that was passed into the function:
```
